Throughout the recent U.S. presidential election, commentators declared that the country had moved into a “post-fact era.”  Political operatives traded conflicting, partisan, statistics.  Fake news stories proliferated, while nonpartisan “fact-checking” organizations tried to rise above the fray.  While claims of a “post-fact era” may have been exaggerated, these events demonstrate the continued relevance of questions like “What does it mean to say something is true?” or “How do we know what is true?”
Both David Hume, in his 1748 essay Enquiry Concerning Human Understanding, and Immanuel Kant, in his 1783 Prolegomena to Any Future Metaphysics, explore these questions and attempt to determine whether the philosophy of metaphysics is possible.  Hume is motivated by the need for an accurate, theoretical philosophy that is epistemologically secure.  In his attempt to provide philosophy with a more solid foundation, he ultimately reaches the conclusion that metaphysics, and in general a priori judgements about the world, are not possible.  Kant, writing thirty-five years later, responds to Hume’s skepticism, and argues for both the validity of metaphysics and the possibility a priori judgements about the world.
Both philosophers make similar definitions, yet have different names for the concepts they discuss.  For clarity’s sake, I will use Kant’s terms throughout, except where it is necessary to make fine distinctions in usage.
The key distinction for both philosophers is between analytical and synthetical judgements.  Kant defines an analytical judgement as one which arises through the analysis of an idea.  The idea already contains the judgement, and it is reason or logic that provides the support for this judgement.  An analytical judgement, Kant writes, “depend wholly on the Law of Contradiction”—that is, to believe the opposite of an analytical judgement is to reach some sort of contradiction (Kant 15).  For example, the statement “all octagons has eight sides” is an analytical judgement because eight-sidedness is part of the definition of an octagon.  Analytical judgements operate without reference to objects external to the mind, and are therefore a priori. (Hume calls these analytical judgements relations of ideas).
Synthetical judgements (matters of fact for Hume) rely on more than the Law of Contradiction; they synthesize various ideas and pieces of information rather than analyzing a single one.  Empirical judgements (those based on experience), for example, are synthetical, because they are based on experience, not just analysis of an idea.  Kant also argues that a judgements such as “4+3=7” is also synthetic, since the notion of 7 is not an inherent part of either 4 or 3.  Hume does not classify mathematical statements as synthetic, however, and this disagreement provides the basis for Kant’s response to him. 
Unlike analytical judgements, which are a priori, synthetical judgements can in theory be both a priori and a posteriori.  Kant and Hume reduce the question of the possibility of metaphysics to the question of the possibility of synthetical a priori judgements.  Metaphysics, while often relying on analytical judgements, must also go beyond them to be able to say anything about the world and how we fit into it.  “This science [of metaphysics] has something peculiar in the production of its a priori cognitions, which must therefore be distinguished from the features it has in common with other rational knowledge,” Kant writes (23).  Metaphysical judgements are therefore synthetical.  
Hume begins by investigating our justification for synthetical judgements.  While analytical judgements cannot be negated without contradiction—the statement “no octagons have eight sides” is patently ridiculous—the same cannot be said for synthetical judgements.  He writes, “[t]hat the sun will not rise tomorrow is just as intelligible as—and no more contradictory than—the proposition that the sun will rise tomorrow” (Hume 11).  That is, the justification for synthetical judgements does not come from within them.  We cannot prove directly that the sun will rise tomorrow, without reference to anything else.
If there is no inherent justification for synthetical judgements, we might ask what justification there can possibly be for such judgements.  Hume answers that reasoning about matters of fact is based on the concept of causality.  
Hume’s central argument is that knowledge of causality can come only from experience.  A judgement of causality can never be a priori.  He points out that there is nothing in the nature of an object that can tell us about its causes and effects, if we have never seen the object before.  A billiard ball rolling towards another does not logically and necessarily imply that the second ball will start moving after being hit.  We only expect it do so because of our many experiences of similar situations.  As Hume explains, without experience it isn’t possible for one to “[infer] from the fluidity and transparency of water that it could drown him, or from the light and warmth of fire that it could burn him” (12).  In general, there is no reason to believe that the laws of nature will continue to operate the same way from one day to the next, other than our long experience of their constancy.  Thus, Hume claims, knowledge of causality comes not from reason but from experience, and that it is only custom and habit that give us a notion of causality and an expectation that things follow universal laws.
If we cannot reason a priori about causality, he concludes, we must adopt a sort of skepticism as regards metaphysical (and other) judgements.  Causality itself may be nothing more than an internal construction.  This doesn’t mean that we can’t rely on our notions of causality—Hume warns of the “risk of going too far and undermining the reasoning we use in common life, [of] pushing its doubts so far as to destroy action and belief” (19).  We must simply recognize that causality is supported by experience, not reason.
Kant begins by wondering “whether Hume’s objection [to causality] could … be put into a general form” (Kant 7).  He frames his analysis in the abstract terms of synthetical a priori judgements rather than a focus on cause and effect.  
One of Kant’s key contentions, and one of the few points on which he completely disagrees with Hume, is that mathematical judgements are a priori and synthetical.  While mathematical proof proceeds on the basis of the Law of Contradiction, and therefore might seem to be analytical, the foundations of mathematics itself are not analytical.  Kant argues that the mathematics at its core is based on intuition, specifically, the intuition of time and space.  To add two and three, we must imagine two units, then add three more units, and then count all of the units to reach our result—five.  Even if we examine the axiomatic mathematics of the present day (i.e., the formalization of mathematics in terms of sets), we are forced to conclude that axioms merely make our intuition precise and explicit.  Mathematical judgements, therefore, are more than the mere analysis of a single idea—they require the additional principles of our spatial and temporal intuition, whether used directly or formalized as axioms.
We see in Kant’s discussion of mathematical intuition a hint of his so-called “Copernican Shift.”  Before Kant, philosophers viewed space and time as something external to themselves:  we exist in space, and move through time.  Kant argues instead that space and time live within us, and are the lens through which we experience the world.  Our reality is defined by our intuitions of space and time.  There is no reason to expect that other creatures should experience space and time in the same way, just as a color-blind person does not experience sight the same way as a person with ‘normal’ vision.  Kant’s key point is that the intuitions of space and time, being internal, are therefore a priori.  This means that mathematical judgements are likewise a priori.
Kant then broadens his inquiries to include the science of nature.  He defines nature to be “the existence of things, so far as it is determined according to universal laws” (50).  If something does not follow universal law, then it cannot be said to be nature.  Kant clarifies further that nature is about our experience of objects, and not their true existence outside of our perception (which is impossible to know a priori or a posteriori).  That is, nature is concerned only with the representations of objects in our minds.  He claims first that a pure science of nature is possible, one which is synthetical and a priori.  While we cannot reason a priori about the specific laws of nature, such as Newton’s Law of Gravitation, we can reason about the conditions that must exist for nature, and therefore for our very experience, to be possible.  These “conditions of the possibility of experience,” as Kant terms them, are the universal a priori laws of nature.  They must hold for our experience to be possible.
Kant returns to his definition of empirical judgements (which are synthetical) to make a further distinction, between judgements of experience and judgements of perception.  A judgement of perception is “subjectively valid,” and only true for the person who makes the judgement.  If someone drinks lemonade and declares it to be sour, they are making a judgement of perception.  A judgement of experience, on the other hand, is “objectively valid” and must hold true for everyone, for all time.  In fact, Kant says, objective validity is universality—a judgement that is universal is by definition objectively valid.  He essentially redefines truth as that which is universally agreed upon, rather than some sort of abstract universal entity that is fixed outside of the bounds of our experience.  There is no absolute Truth, there is only the truth that we collectively agree on.  
Kant claims that all empirical judgements start as judgements of perception.  When we first make a judgement based on experience, we cannot immediately assert that it will hold universally.  How, then, do we transform a judgement of perception into a judgement of experience?  Kant’s answer is that the judgement of perception “must be subsumed under a concept, which determines the form of the judging” (58).  A single experience or perception is therefore understood in terms of a larger and more general concept, such as cause, possibility, substance, unity, or negation (61).  These concepts are pure, a priori features of our understanding.  We do not learn them from experience, as Hume argues; we use them to shape experience into truth.
For example, the observation “when the sun shines on the stone, the stone grows warm” begins as a judgement of perception, an association between two separate experiences.  To make it a judgement of experience, it must be subsumed under the general concept of causality: “the sun warms the stone” (59, footnote by Caurs).  We have transformed a simple correlation into a statement about causation that must hold universally.
The concepts of understanding that Kant posits are the conditions of the possibility of experience, for they are the highest abstractions that allow us to piece together our experiences to form universal law.  Since these concepts exist a priori, synthetical a priori judgements about the science of nature are therefore possible.
Kant and Hume agree that a judgement about causality does not follow directly from experience alone.  Hume concludes from this that is not possible to make an objective truth claim about causality.  For Hume, claiming that X causes Y means that there is, external to us, some sort of causal mechanism linking X and Y.  Since we cannot directly experience this, we cannot hold it to be true in the first place.  Kant avoids this by redefining truth.  There is no external causal mechanism for Kant; rather, to claim that X causes Y is to claim that everyone in the world, for all time, must judge that X and Y are subsumed under the concept of Cause.  We bring the notion of causality to experience, and claim that our judgement must hold for everyone, rather than trying to extract the notion of causality from experience itself.  This allows us to study causality by itself, and a priori, even as we recognize that a particular judgement of cause and effect is necessarily based on experience.
Kant’s “Copernican shift” of truth from external to internal—from something defined absolutely to something defined by humanity generally—is perhaps his most powerful contribution.  Hume dealt absolute truth a fatal blow with his argument for skepticism, yet Kant was able to demonstrate that truth could be conceived in something other than absolute terms, and that it may in fact be more useful and practical to shift truth and certainty inside the reference frame of our existence.  In doing so, Kant is able to move beyond the epistemological doubts of Descartes and others, beyond worries about the differences between our reality and the True Reality.  It is important to note that Kant’s definition does not force him to accept a multiplicity of truths (which one might argue if we are each allowed to take part in the creation of truth).  Simply because someone may make a judgement of experience that the world is flat does not mean that they are correct.  It means only that they believe that flatness of the Earth must be held universally.  Only when we examine all of humanity, across all of time, can we sort out the judgements of experience that are actually true from the ones that are false.  Kant provides the framework for approaching truth in this way, but he does not presume to provide a universal formula for determining truth itself.
In some ways, however, Kant defeats his own purpose.  His definition of truth rests on transforming subjective experience into an objective judgement.  This precludes judgements about that which we cannot experience: the existence of God, of souls, of a world outside our own.  While these matters were not perhaps Kant’s original focus, it cannot be denied that Kant’s response to Hume inextricably binds the metaphysical to the physical.  His a priori concepts of understanding do not allow for much extra-physical exploration; they serve more as tools to explain how we form judgements of experience.  And the temporal aspect of his definition of truth means that in the present we can never be fully certain of our judgements of experience, unlike mathematical or logical judgements which have no such temporal component.
In the end, Kant presents an ingenious solution to the problem of absolute knowledge of truth that had plagued philosophers for centuries.  While philosophers continue to debate the complexities of the nature of truth, there can be no doubt that Kant’s contributions marked a paradigm shift, the effects of which are still being felt today.
